From New York Times, I'm Michael Baro.
This is the daily.
[music]
Today marks the sixth day of an unusual
[music] government shutdown in which
Democrats have withheld funding to a
single federal agency, the Department of
Homeland Security, in order to force
President Trump to change how thousands
[music] of its agents enforce
immigration laws. Today, my conversation
[music] with an unlikely leader of the
Democratic strategy, Senator [music]
Katherine Cortez Masto of Nevada.
>> [music]
[music]
>> It's Thursday, February [music] 19th.
>> Senator,
>> hello. How are you? Good morning.
>> It's Michael Barbaro.
>> Michael, how I recognize a voice. how
are you?
>> Oh, that's flattering. Thank you for
making time for us.
>> Well, thank you. I appreciate uh the
opportunity to talk with you and and by
the way, thank you for the great
reporting you do. Seriously, it's
important. Yeah.
>> You are, as we speak, in Nevada,
>> correct?
>> Not in Washington DC because Congress is
on a
>> somewhat illtimed recess.
>> That's right.
>> And I said illtimed because we're in the
middle of a partial government shutdown.
And I want to talk about your role in
that. We tend, Senator, to think of the
lawmakers who become the face of a
government shutdown or one of the faces
of it as a particular kind of lawmaker,
a fire brand, a rabble rouser, pick your
adjective. You are pretty distinctly not
that. Does that seem fair? I
>> I would agree that I'm a moderate.
That's to me those are the moderates are
are people who are working to get things
done, right? Who work in a bipartisan
way who think that good government is
important that we still have to work
together to do our jobs. We still have
to deliver for the American public
whether it's in our state where we live
or across the country. And I think most
people, at least when I'm in my state,
they expect that. They expect you to not
only work on their behalf, but work in a
bipartisan way. But they also know that
there are times and I think it's okay to
be out there and pick that fight and say
no, this is a battle I'm going to be
very vocal about. This is one I am going
to stand up and say this can occur. And
you see that not I've done that and you
will see that for many moderates across
the country doing the same thing. Well,
the last time there was a government
shutdown, you opposed it. I think you
voted against it something like 15
times. And so I don't tend to think of
you as a shutdown person.
>> I see what you're saying. Yeah. So, let
me just say this. For me, there's
nothing wrong with calling out an
administration, I don't care what party
you are, that's hurting our community,
that is challenging our very norms,
particularly around, in this case, law
and order. They need to be challenged
and they need to be called out.
>> Well, that's what we want to talk about,
how you got to this point where you
decided to support withholding funding
from the Department of Homeland
Security. And I think it stands out that
you have joined this effort because of
your background in law enforcement.
You're a former attorney general in the
state. You have very strong set of
relationships with law enforcement,
which I'm sure we're going to be talking
about in this conversation. DHS, the
Department of Homeland Security is a
major law enforcement agency and you
have decided that funding should be
withheld from it over the way it has
approached immigration enforcement and I
want to talk about how given your
background you got to that point. So
tell us that story. Where does it begin
over the past year or so?
>> So let me just say back in September
when we were talking about the first
shutdown
>> over healthcare.
>> Over healthcare. That's right. I knew
going into that argument, we weren't
going to win it.
>> You knew that you were not going to win
it.
>> You could play it out. You could see
that the Republicans were not going to
support an extension of the ACA tax
credits because here's why. Most
Republicans never even voted for the
ACA. So, they weren't going to go out
there and vote for an ACA tax credit.
[snorts] So, I knew it wasn't going to
happen.
>> Right? You didn't see an outcome where
the core issue of healthcare cost was
going to be addressed.
>> But here's the thing, Michael. Here's
the I do know that because this fight
was taken on, many people across the
country understood that we need to do a
better job of healthcare. So to me, this
is a perfect example of where Democrats
come in. We are fighting for healthcare.
We're fighting for affordability and
access. Republicans don't care. The
Republicans do not care about that.
>> You're saying that even though you
didn't support that last shutdown, you
ended up seeing the value of it in
sending a message. So let me get to this
next shutdown which you are supporting.
Tell me how you decided and kind of when
you decided that there was a problem
with immigration
enforcement as it was being practiced by
the Department of Homeland Security
because this all started of course with
President Trump's second term a little
over a year ago. And I wonder if you
could just take me on the journey you
went through.
>> So let me give you some background. Most
people don't know. Most of my career has
been in law enforcement. Um quite
honestly when Homeland Security was
created um I was working in the uh US
Attorney's Office in Washington DC as a
federal prosecutor and my husband was a
Secret Service agent.
>> Wow. So you're both in law enforcement.
>> That's right. And I continued that work.
Became attorney general here in the
state of Nevada. did that for eight
years. Worked with law enforcement, with
prosecutors my entire career and
understand the benefits and what we are
trying to achieve when we keep our
community safe around community
policing. If you're effective law
enforcement agency, you're going to get
in the community and build that public
trust. That's what it's about. You want
to go after the violent criminals. You
want to hold them accountable, but you
also want to protect individuals
constitutional rights because it's about
keeping your community safe. now comes
along this administration and they have
all of this money the Republicans have
given them in their tax bill,
>> right? The one big beautiful bill as he
calls it. Yep.
>> The one big beautiful bill. Republicans
give them about $170 billion altogether
and that's 75 billion going to ICE which
the normal annual budget for ICE is
anywhere about 8 to 10 billion. There's
no strings attached. No strings
attached. And what we are seeing now is
because they have all this money and
because they had this quota from Steven
Miller to do 3,000 immigration
deportations and detainments a day, they
started onboarding whoever they could to
work at ICE, right?
>> And not only were they onboarding them
very quickly, they lowered their
standards for hiring them and they
decreased the training that most law
enforcement go through as they're
looking to do community policing. Right?
deescalation standards, use of force
standards, none of that.
>> So, you become unsettled just from
recognizing that there's a sudden hiring
binge and that the standards are
changing and that the training in your
mind is insufficient. This is back many
months ago. So, that's your first set of
concerns.
How do those evolve over time?
So then as we are seeing in communities,
this administration unfortunately
wasn't about public safety. Even though
Donald Trump was talking about going
after violent criminals, which listen, I
think we all, everybody in the
community, I don't care where you live,
you want violent criminals out of your
communities. You want your community
safe. You want to know that when you
call 911 and you have concerns, police
officers are going to respond. They're
going to keep you safe, respect your
rights, but go after those violent
criminals. What we were seeing, however,
is just the opposite. Now they're
sending in to our communities
numbers of agents that normally were not
assigned in those communities.
>> This deportation force of excessive
force and they are coming into
communities and they are just roving
patrols which we've never seen before.
Roving patrols. They are knocking on
doors. They are not even knocking. Half
the time they're going in and without a
judicial warrant. They're pulling people
out of their cars. They are following
people, I know this because this
happened in Las Vegas,
>> following people with masks home from
church.
>> Following people home from church in
your state,
>> home from church in my state. And I talk
to law enforcement all the time. I also
know that during this period of time
they actually went after some of my
local law enforcement police officers
went after their families and
threatened.
>> I just want to slow down and understand
this. You
found evidence that immigration
enforcement agents were pursuing the
families of local law enforcement.
>> Correct. Correct.
>> Was it because of their immigration
status? It was because of their
immigration status that they had been in
Nevada for a long period of time. They
were not violent criminals, but they had
been working, paying taxes, raising
their family, and they were going after
these individuals. And they were
threatening the careers of these law
enforcement officers that their
families. That tells me they're out of
control. That tells me there is another
reason why they're coming into our
communities. It wasn't about going after
the most the violent criminals. It was
much more heinous and it was not at the
level that we saw in Chicago or
Minneapolis, but it is happening.
>> And what you're describing, this is all
happening before Minneapolis.
>> That's correct. And [snorts] then we see
what plays out in Minneapolis when they
send that police force in. uh national
police force that this administration
wants to create to just come in and
brutalize communities and scare people
under the guise of some sort of
immigration enforcement. And
>> a national police force that's
brutalizing I mean that those are some
very loaded phrases. I just want to make
sure I'm understanding them.
>> Yeah. No, please. Because I think that
is absolutely correct. They are going
after peaceful protesters. killing
peaceful protesters who are outraged
that they're coming into their
communities and actually not even going
after violent criminals and they're
violating individuals rights. They are
detaining and deporting US citizens.
They are using their administrative
warrants to go into people's private
properties. They have violated the first
amendment, the second amendment, the
fourth amendment, the fifth amendment,
the 10th amendment of our constitution.
That's what this administration is
doing. So yes, it demands action
>> and and so in your mind, given your
background in law enforcement, this is
not how law enforcement is is supposed
to be operating. And in mid January, you
you do something about it. And you
introduce a piece of legislation about
ICE that would divert much of this money
that we're talking about that came from
the one big beautiful bill
that was designated for things like ICE
and divert it to local law enforcement.
>> They have too much money that 75 billion
in ICE. Too much. So let's take it away.
Let's let's let's divert it to local law
enforcement and state law enforcement
who are trained to work in our
communities, who know how to manage a
protest or even pull somebody over in
the car without violating their
constitutional rights. It's the same I I
hear it and see it in my community. Same
conversation that you saw from the
police chief in Minneapolis saying the
same thing, right? It's just common
sense. we had him on the show
>> because I also know working and talking
to my local police chiefs and sheriffs
that not only are they understaffed, but
when when this deportation force comes
into their communities, they are then
overwhelmed. And part of this is if we
are really working to keep our
communities safe, let's trust those
agencies that are trained to do it,
>> right? and take the money away from
these ICE agents who clearly not only
are not trained, they don't care to be
trained and they don't care that they're
violating and harming individuals and or
killing them. and Republicans don't
embrace this proposal you have and you
and your colleagues decide that
something else has to be done given that
and what you all come up with is to use
your power of the purse, your role as
the minority in the Senate to hold up
funding for DHS in a spending bill
unless you get a series of reforms
within DHS. pass. And I want to quickly
summarize those reforms that you all ask
for. Uh you ask for there to be warrants
when these agents come to make arrests
or to go to a house or a business. You
ask that agents IDs be visible. You ask
that they no longer wear masks.
And I wonder why you all decide that
those are the reforms that if you don't
get, you will hold up DHS funding. H how
you arrive at that negotiation tactic
essentially?
>> Yeah, I can tell you very clearly from
my background in working with law
enforcement, those are common sense
practices that our local law enforcement
engage in every day
>> to keep our community safe. That's why.
And so a lot of the the policies and
protocols that we had developed in the
Democratic asks were just common sense
policies that our local law enforcement
and and state officers were already
doing
>> that you now want federal immigration
agents to use as well.
>> That's correct. Why shouldn't they?
So late last week, having not gotten any
of these requests granted to you by the
administration, by DHS, you and your
Democratic colleagues in the Senate, you
cast a vote to block funding to the
agency. And you know this well because
you talked about the previous shutdown
over healthcare. Shutdowns involve a lot
of pain, a lot of unintended pain.
Workers don't get paid, but a lot of
them have to work anyway. So services
become strained. In the case of DHS,
that means services like airport
security, TSA, cyber security, FEMA,
Coast Guard, and you all have made a
decision that you know will probably
cause some of that
pain. And I want to know why you think
it's worth it to do this.
If we do not stand up against this
lawlessness that we see this
administration engaging in in our
communities,
then what is left for us? If you carry
out to the logical conclusion that this
administration has created their own
police force, that they're made up of
individuals who don't follow normal
protocols that police follow to keep our
communities safe, and they're doing just
the opposite. and they're sending them
out under the guise of immigration
enforcement.
What's next for them?
>> And the concern is the next is they're
going to bring them out around our
election process. They're going to try
to claim the election is
>> that's what you fear is next.
>> Absolutely. It's the logical conclusion
that you see happening. This
administration is using this police
force to do its bidding. Listen, I never
thought that I would see the day where
immigration agents that I worked with in
the past at a federal level would be
engaging in the brutality that they're
doing now.
[music]
>> Well, Senator, we're going to take a
break and when we come back, I want to
engage with the challenges that
Democrats, including you, may face in
explaining what this shutdown is and
what it isn't [music] to the public.
We'll be right back.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Senator, I want to turn now to a
fundamental challenge for you and your
party when it comes to this shutdown of
DHS. You've made clear that you see this
as a question of what good law
enforcement is and what it isn't and
that right now immigration enforcement
operations represent bad law enforcement
to you. But to some meaningful
percentage of voters, this could end up
looking like something else, which is
potentially Democrats being weak on
immigration. How do you respond to that?
Well, I think traditionally I have seen
that the Democrats are weak on
immigration under the last
administration under we have seen that
>> full full stop. I mean, you're conceding
that.
>> Yeah. Well, absolutely. Because this has
been my challenge. I know as somebody
who has worked in this space, we can do
both. We can secure our borders. We can
address the human trafficking, the drug
trafficking, weapons trafficking that's
happening at the border. I know because
as attorney general, I worked on it. I'm
not a border state, but I'm close enough
that I work with the Mexican AGs on
these very issues. We can work to secure
it, fund it, and at the same time have
an immigration process that is treats
people with respect, who want to come to
this country, who have been playing by
the rules, who have actually contributed
to our communities and paying taxes and
raising their families. We can do both.
But I have seen Democrats shy away from
that. They don't talk about the balance
between the two. And I I watched as the
last administration under Biden was too
afraid to talk about securing the
border. So it's just to me this is
common sense. This is where most of the
at least in Nevada and I see most of the
country. This is how they think.
Americans aren't stupid. They can see
both sides of it and want both sides of
it. But by defunding the agency that
oversees
immigration enforcement, including at
the border, how do you avoid the
perception that you are making that
work, which as you just acknowledged,
Democrats are not known for being
effective enough at? How do you avoid
making that work harder or and less
effective?
So what my ask is and what I've been
talking about with my colleagues and
this is where Democrats need to be
aligned is that we are not saying
completely defund ICE.
>> What we are saying is fund them to the
level they traditionally were so that we
are securing our borders
>> and we are also working in our
communities with local law enforcement
to go after the violent criminals under
the immigration jurisdiction that they
have that they've traditionally done.
So, this isn't a defunding ICE or CBP.
It's just let's give them the funding
they need to actually operate under the
traditional jurisdiction to help keep
our communities safe and work with local
law enforcement.
>> Right. And it's you're saying don't
don't overfund them. But in making the
argument you're making, you're you're
drawing an interesting distinction.
You're suggesting that many voters want
and expect a certain conduct from
immigration enforcement agents and that
they want enforcement to be focused on
criminals. We've talked to plenty of
people on this show and from what you
said, you're you're a listener, voters
who want interior enforcement based on
the fact that they believe illegally
crossing the border into the US itself
is a crime. And so in making the
distinctions that you are, are you in a
certain sense potentially creating an
incentive? The incentive that that
Democrats have been criticized for
creating which is you can come to the
United States, you can come illegally
and you can stay
>> and isn't that what President Trump won
his election in part based on?
>> Yeah. No, here here let me just put a
finer point on this. I do think there is
a role for Congress when it comes to our
immigration laws, right? Yes, we we have
to have a process for people to come
here. Yes, we want to make sure they
move through that process. Congress has
failed to do its job and update the laws
and that's what we should be doing. But
let me just say, Michael, people play
politics with this all the time
>> and it is an issue to me that is so
frustrating. people, Republicans,
Democrats, it's all politics to them. It
is not about how we move our country
forward with individuals who want to
work hard, be a part of our community,
and have shown that and raise their
families. I am a US senator because my
grandfather came from Chihuahua, Mexico,
>> and then he served in the US Army and
became a US citizen. Now, h why should
my story be any different than any other
person who comes to this country and
wants the same opportunities for their
for their kids and their grandchildren?
That's what this is about. But when the
Trump administration and Steven Miller
decide that all immigrants are horrific
and the rapists and they're killers and
we don't want any immigrant here, that
is wrong. And it goes against our laws
in this country and who we are. And to
me, this is a failing on Congress. This
is a failing on my Republican colleagues
who refuse to come to the table and work
with us on to address this and instead
would rather play politics with this to
win elections.
>> How confident are you that the position
you're articulating here is where most
Americans are? And I asked that because
I have some inside information from my
colleagues in the newsroom in the
Washington bureau who saw a memo that
you circulated to some of your
colleagues in the Democratic caucus of
the Senate making the case that there is
a right way to talk about this that
involves both criticizing immigration
enforcement as it currently exists while
also establishing some firm
understandings about what is wrong with
illegal immigration and and where
enforcement needs to be very tough.
>> Yeah, [snorts] you're right. We I have
been working as part of the what we call
the mod squad, moderate senators to
ensure that the states that we come
from, which are swing states like
Nevada, where there is a diverse group
of people living there, including in in
terms of party affiliation, Democrats,
Republicans, nonpartisans in equal
numbers. These are the the individuals
that are going to make the difference in
whether or not Democrats are going to be
in control of the Senate. Mhm.
>> That's how we win the Senate back. And
if we are going to appeal to them and
talk to them and listen to them, we have
to understand what they care about. And
the polling that you're referring to is
a polling of just those swing states and
who those voters are. And you're
absolutely right. They want safe
communities. But they also are demanding
what they are seeing with ICE. They
don't like the over excessive abuse of
ICE. They want ICE to focus on the
violent criminals. and they want to know
that people are working to help keep
their communities safe from those
violent criminals, the worst of the
worst.
>> Okay? So, they want an effective, this
polling shows that voters want an
effective ICE that follows the rules,
but that does its job, particularly when
it comes to detaining, deporting
criminal immigrants who are here
illegally.
>> That's right. And that's and that's what
I say is is our conversation with them
is yes, we've got to get them back to
the time where we do this where we allow
the system to work to go after and find
individuals that are the worst of the
worst, the most violent. We also hold
people accountable to following our
immigration laws. That is the
traditional role of ICE and CBP and
that's what many people want and
understand. They do not want what they
are seeing playing out in front of their
very eyes on TV or even in their
communities. And quite honestly, that's
why they're coming out and protesting.
That's why they're using their voices.
That's why you see them out there and
and they shouldn't be killed for it.
>> I want to go back to the last shutdown
as a point of reference.
leaders of your party like Senator Chuck
Schumer, they believe that ultimately
that shutdown, which you didn't support,
but it sounds like you gained some
valuable lessons from that that was a
political victory in the way that it
elevated the issue of rising healthcare
costs and put it on Republicans. But
even as a victory politically, it did
not result in policy changes.
If this shutdown of DHS becomes
something like that, a messaging win
without policy changes that you're
asking for, would you be satisfied with
that?
>> Yes. Because here's why.
>> You would be
>> because here here's why.
>> At the end of the day, this is about an
administration who is out of control.
And if they are not willing to even
compromise or work with us on addressing
what the American public sees with this
ICE agency, they're not willing to come
to work with us to reign them in.
There's a problem with that
administration.
And the only way at the end of the day
for us to get more accountability over
this administration is to take control
of Congress, is to win in these
elections, whether it is in the House or
the Senate. We have more oversight role.
We have more accountability. We can call
them in. We can demand change. We have
more control over the appropriations.
Right now, what we are seeing in this
country is the Republicans in control
have abdicated their role in Congress to
this administration and doing whatever
the bidding of this administration,
whatever it wants to do.
>> So even if you don't win these reforms,
you may win the argument. And winning
the argument might then mean winning the
election. And then you can in your mind
change the way this administration
operates when it comes to immigration
enforcement.
>> And that's how the process works. That's
who who we are as Americans. That's what
this is about. That's what this country
is. And that's worth fighting for.
Whether we win the policy debate or we
win the messaging war, the end of the
day, it's do we win as a country. Do we
win when we say no more to this
administration sending these thugs into
our communities? And we can do that as a
country when we elect and make change.
>> Let's say for a moment that you do end
up getting what you want at some point
from the administration. You do end up
with some understanding that the masks
might come off these agents, that
they're going to be using warrants and
they're going to be identifying
themselves, you know, with badges as
they go about their work. Even if you
get all that with agencies like ICE and
with Border Patrol, given the way they
have operated and given the rhetoric
from the president, given the conduct
that you have described as heinous, I
mean, you've called some of these folks
thugs. Even if you get these reforms,
will these be agencies and agents that
you can have faith in? or is the problem
here a lot bigger than tactics and
conduct?
>> That's a fair question and I think the
the problem here is a lot bigger. Right.
Of course, not only do we want these
reforms, but we want to be able to
ensure we can enforce the administration
to follow these reforms and we have seen
in the past a lack of trust from this
administration. They say one thing and
do another. So it is a valid point and
it is something that I not just members
of Congress but I think the American
public are grappling with and why they
are demanding change in the elected
leaders and they're demanding and
calling out what they are seeing. I
think this administration thrives on
chaos and uncertainty and constantly
moving the goalposts. That's how this
president has succeeded in the past.
That's how he will continue to operate.
but is not how you govern and is not
what the American people want.
>> Senator, how does the shutdown come to
an end or does it not come to an end
until after the midterms if the
administration isn't really going to
negotiate?
>> Yeah, I don't know the pathway. I I
can't I don't know. Uh Michael, I can
only say at this moment in this time,
the changes that we are demanding,
it has to occur. We cannot see another
community being brutalized by these
lawless ICE agents and CBP under this
administration. We just cannot.
[music]
>> Well, Senator, thank you [music] very
much for your time. We really appreciate
it.
>> Thank you, Michael.
>> [music]
>> On Wednesday afternoon, Democratic
[music] leaders in Congress chastised
both President Trump and congressional
Republicans for failing to act with
urgency to end the shutdown of the
Department of Homeland Security. Donald
Trump spent the weekend on the golf
course with Ronda Santis
and so [music] we've not seen any
highlevel effort coming from the
president or from the House or Senate
Republican leaders. We have no idea
where they're at in the midst of a
crisis of their own making. During a
news conference, House Democratic Leader
Hakee Jeff said that his party's
proposal for ending the shutdown was in
the hands of the White House, but that
he was still waiting for their response.
[music]
>> ICE needs to be reformed in a dramatic,
bold, meaningful, and transformational
manner. And if that doesn't happen, the
DHS funding bill will not move forward.
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know
[music] today. California officials said
that eight of the nine skiers missing
since an avalanche on Tuesday have died.
The avalanche now [music] ranks as one
of the deadliest in the state's modern
history.
The skiers were part of a group of 15,
[music]
including four guides, on a 3-day
backcountry expedition near Lake Tahoe.
Six of those who were caught in the
avalanche [music] were rescued after
they used a combination of emergency
beacons [music] and their iPhones to
share their location.
The avalanche occurred after [music]
nearly 3 ft of snow had accumulated in
the area over a short period.
[music]
Today's episode was produced by Mary
Wilson and [music] Eric Krupky. It was
edited by Rachel Quester and Chris
Hackel. contains music by Alicia [music]
Etup and Marian Lozano and was
engineered by Chris Wood. Special thanks
[music] to Phil Corbett and Nick Pitman.
[music]
That's it for [music] the daily. I'm
Mabaro.
See you tomorrow.